## Switching <!-- omit in toc -->

# Route Lookup Exercises

*Academic year 2024-2025*  
*Telematics Engineering Department - Universidad Carlos III de Madrid*

---

## Exercise 1

### Section 1.I. Route Lookup Operation

A certain router runs the route lookup before classification. If RL operation
takes 15 ns, how much time is allowed for classification to reach a throughput
of 40 Gbps (average packet size: 100 bytes)?  Show your calculus.

### Section 1.II. Binary Tries

#### Question 1.II.a

Build a binary trie for the following prefix set. Taking into account that each
node in the binary trie requires a memory access, how many memory accesses are
needed for a search in the worst case?

| Prefix Label | Prefix Value |
| :----------: | :----------: |
| P1           | `0*`         |
| P2           | `00001*`     |
| P3           | `001*`       |
| P4           | `1*`         |
| P5           | `1000*`      |
| P6           | `1001*`      |
| P7           | `1010*`      |
| P8           | `1011*`      |
| P9           | `111*`       |

#### Question 1.II.b

For the previous prefixes, build the path-compressed trie. Show the next bit to
compare in the matching nodes. In this trie, how many memory accesses are
needed for the search of the following 8-bit addresses: 10011000 and 11100011?

## Exercise 2

### Section 2.I. Route Lookup Operation

How much time is allowed in a given router for route lookup to reach a
throughput of 20 Gbps (Data: average packet size: 200 bytes; Router needs 30 ns
per packet in other operations) . Show your computation.

## Section 2.II. Multibit Trie

Build a multibit trie of fixed stride size for the following prefix set (the
prefixes have been expanded to a equivalent set of length 3 and 5). How many
memory accesses are needed for the search of the following 8-bit addresses:
10011000 and 11100011?

| Prefix label | Prefix Value | Expanded Prefixes      |
| :----------: | :----------- | :--------------------  |
| P1           | `0*`         | `000*`; `010*`; `011*` |
| P2           | `00001*`     | `00001*`               |
| P3           | `001*`       | `001*`                 |
| P4           | `1*`         | `100*`; `101*`; `110*` |
| P5           | `1000*`      | `10000*`; `10001*`     |
| P6           | `1001*`      | `10010*`; `10011*`     |
| P7           | `1010*`      | `10100*`; `10101*`     |
| P8           | `1011*`      | `10110*`; `10111*`     |
| P9           | `111*`       | `111*`                 |

## Exercise 3

The following table represents a forwarding table.

| Prefix | Value  |
| :----: | :----: |
| P1     | `10*`  |
| P2     | `01*`  |
| P3     | `110*` |
| P4     | `0010` |
| P5     | `0110` |
| P6     | `0111` |

### Question 3.a

Build a binary trie for the following prefix set. Show clearly where the
prefixes are.

### Question 3.b

Apply the path-compressed trie to Q1 structure (trie PATRICIA). Re-draw the
trie showing the required additional information to make searchs (in other
words, the number of bits to skip in the nodes where it would be needed) 3

## Exercise 4

The following table represents a forwarding table.

|     | Prefix/length |
| :-- | :------------ |
| P1  | `0.0.0.0/1`   |
| P2  | `32.0.0.0/3`  |
| P3  | `0.0.0.0/5`   |
| P4  | `8.0.0.0/5`   |
| P5  | `16.0.0.0/5`  |
| P6  | `24.0.0.0/5`  |
| P7  | `64.0.0.0/2`  |
| P8  | `128.0.0.0/2` |
| P9  | `192.0.0.0/3` |
| P10 | `224.0.0.0/3` |

### Question 4.a

Build a binary trie for the prefix set in the table. How many memory access are
required in the worst case? Note: Assume the root node does not imply a memory
access.

### Question 4.b

Apply the path-compressed trie). Re-draw the trie showing the required
additional information to make searchs (in other words, b = bit to look at; c=
bit string to be compared with in case it is required)

### Question 4.c

Build the multibit trie using a fixed stride size equal to 2.

## Exercise 5

The following table represents a forwarding table.

|    | Prefijo/longitud |
| -- | ---------------- |
| P0 | `0.0.0.0/0`      |
| P1 | `116.0.0.0/6`    |
| P2 | `120.0.0.0/6`    |
| P3 | `124.0.0.0/6`    |
| P4 | `224.0.0.0/4`    |
| P5 | `224.0.0.0/6`    |
| P6 | `236.0.0.0/6`    |
| P7 | `252.0.0.0/6`    |

### Question 5.a

Build a binary trie for the prefix set in the table. How many memory access are
required in the worst case? Note: Assume the root node does not imply a memory
access.

### Question 5.b

Apply the path-compressed trie). Re-draw the trie showing the required
additional information to make searchs (in other words, b = bit to look at; c=
bit string to be compared with in case it is required)

### Question 5.c

Build the multibit trie using a fixed stride size equal to 3.
